- quality. what is it?
- it's in our stated values. We have a quality department. We have quality engineers. What does a quality team do?
- ensure the system gracefully handles unusual inputs
- anything else?
- fulfills its desired functionality
- software's complicated. Let's look at something simpler.
- doorknobs
- what makes a high quality doorknob?
- (anecdote about parents' ridiculous doorknobs)
- this company should be out of business? Why are its customers
  defending its shoddy products?
- imagine someone who thinks software is built like bridges.
- they walk around the dev office. Wow, so much technology!
  so much code! They must really be building this thing solid
  with all that code holding it up!
- technology, modernism, sophistication
- we've adopted proxies for quality
- but these are not the same as quality. not by a long shot
- we use them as synonyms for "good" because "good" is so elusive
  and hard to define. It's vague. It feels very subjective.
- So let's explore this concept of good with some examples
  and see if we can't nail it down.
- What's better, a fast computer or a slow computer? Other things equal, of course.
- is that a fact, or is it just your opinion?
- it's both!
- a fast computer can emulate a slow computer. a slow computer
  can't emulate a fast computer.
- So no matter whether you prefer fast computers or slow computers,
  the faster computer can satisfy you. The slow computer doesn't
  give you that option.
- Faster is objectively better because it removes the need to
  even ask what we subjectively prefer. No matter what our preference
  is, fast is at least as good as slow.
- there's an asymmetry.
- what's better: immutable objects or mutable ones?
- we can create immutable objects if all we have is mutable
  ones. See: immutable.js, mori. Going the other way is basically
  impossible, unless you're going to write an interpreter
  in your pure functional immutable language and then code in
  the interpreted language.
- There's an asymmetry. We can get immutable objects from mutable
  ones, but not the other way around.
- let's do a harder one. What's better, dynamic typing or static
  typing?
  - as we've seen, it's possible to layer static types onto a dynamic language.
  - it's hard to go the other way, unless (as with mutability), you're willing to write an interpreter in your statically-typed language.
  - according to the incompleteness theorem, a type system that admits no unsound programs will exclude some sound ones. So all in all, we lose power by insisting that our languages and programs be completely statically typed. Dynamic is better than static.
- Now, at this point you're probably saying, wait a minute, I
  actually like having immutability and static typing globally
  enforced because they prevent me from making mistakes and also
  protect me from other people's mistakes. By this logic, machine
  code is the "best" programming language.
- And you're right. The reason speed and mutability and dynamicity
  are good is not that they are useful to us in and of themselves,
  but that they are a resource we can spend to get stuff we want.
  Like money, they are fungible.
- This is maybe the clearest when we think about speed. Like what
  is speed good for? Doing computations, right? But the more work
  we give the CPU, the slower everything goes. Speed is a resource
  that we spend on other stuff.
- Same with mutability. Mutability is a resource we can spend
  to get either convenience and faster code (by mutating stuff)
  or safety (by opting for immutability in certain parts of
  our program).
